# Gait-Analysis-Huntington's-Disease

Gait abnormality is a potential diagnostic sign which can occur even in the early, pre-manifest stages of neuro-degenerative diseases such as Huntington's disease. Gait patterns in such patients are characterized by irregular, shortened stride lengths and jerky movements. Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) offer a straightforward and effective framework for disease progression prediction and pattern recognition. In this paper, we propose a two-class Hidden Markov Model (HMM) where a stride model and a transition model were trained individually to identify distinct patterns and abnormalities during the gait-phase transition to distinguish between HD patients with moderate to severe motor dysfunctions and healthy controls. Gaussian Mixture Models were chosen to represent the hidden states of the HMM due to their ability to model diverse and personalised gait patterns. 

The dataset which we developed the HMM to analyse and predict the correlations between gait and the severity of HD was based on an open-access dataset "gait in neurodegenerative diseases" from physio.net https://archive.physionet.org/cgi-bin/atm/ATM. The records in this database consisted of 20 subjects with Huntington's disease and 16 healthy controls. The data for one HD patient was not included in the study due to missing results. The dataset included the stride interval/s, swing interval/s as well as the stance interval and double support interval as a percentage of stride for both feet of the participants.

Raw data was collected using force-sensitive resistors of both Huntington's Disease patients and healthy controls. Participants were instructed to walk along a 77m corridor at normal speed. The data was then filtered through a 12-bit ADC and output with an amplitude resolution of 3000adu/mv to produce a visual waveform, which shows the angular velocity of the foot in the sagittal plane (gyrml). The start of a new stride is represented by the negative peak occuring before the swing phase and the negative peak after the stance phase marks the end of one complete gait cycle.

All tasks were coded using MATLAB version 2023a
